docs: add kubelet Summary API documentation and fix broken links (#51317)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/reference/instrumentation/kubelet-summary-api.md

---
title: Kubelet Summary API
content_type: reference
weight: 55
description: >-
  The kubelet Summary API for accessing node, pod, and container metrics.
---

<!-- overview -->

> The kubelet exposes a Summary API at the `/stats/summary` endpoint that provides

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
The {{< glossary_tooltip text="kubelet" term_id="kubelet" >}} exposes a _Summary_
API at the `/stats/summary` endpoint, that provides
```

aggregated metrics for nodes, pods, containers, and volumes. This API serves as a
primary source for resource usage data collected by the kubelet.

<!-- body -->

## Accessing the Summary API

> You can access the Summary API through the Kubernetes API server as a proxy:

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
You can access the Summary API by using the Kubernetes
{{< glossary_tooltip term_id="kube-apiserver" text="API Server" >}}
as a proxy:
```

```shell

> kubectl get --raw "/api/v1/nodes/<NODE_NAME>/proxy/stats/summary"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# To fetch the summary data, you must be authorized to proxy to this node
kubectl get --raw "/api/v1/nodes/<NODE_NAME>/proxy/stats/summary"
```

```

Replace `<NODE_NAME>` with the name of the node you want to query.

Alternatively, if you have direct access to the kubelet port (typically 10250),
you can query it directly:

```shell

> curl -k https://<NODE_IP>:10250/stats/summary

Reviewer: When we bypass security controls, we should clearly mark this and we should document
something that is not dangerous where we can.
```suggestion
# Because this command skips certificate checks, you should run it locally
# from the node. See the note about security for more information.
curl --insecure https://localhost:10250/stats/summary
```

```

> {{< note >}}
> Direct access to the kubelet requires proper authentication and is typically
> restricted in production environments. The `-k` flag bypasses certificate 
> verification, leaving the connection subject to MITM attacks. Using `kubectl 
> proxy` is the recommended approach for secure access.
> {{< /note >}}

Reviewer: This is a security warning
```suggestion
{{< warning >}}
Direct access to the kubelet via HTTP requires proper authentication and is typically
restricted in production environments. The `--insecure` flag bypasses certificate 
verification, leaving the connection subject to interception (and, potentially,
making your credentials available to an attacker).

You should not use `curl` in insecure mode over a network you do not **fully** trust.

The Kubernetes project recommends that you use `kubectl proxy` for secure access.
{{< /warning >}}
```

> ## API Response Structure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## HTTP responses
```
Yes it's an API, but we also know that it's the body of a message over HTTP.

The Summary API returns a JSON object containing comprehensive metrics organized

> hierarchically:

Reviewer: Is it always JSON? Can the kubelet negotiate other formats, eg CBOR?

```json
{
  "node": {
    "nodeName": "node-1",
    "systemContainers": [...],
    "startTime": "2024-01-01T00:00:00Z",
    "cpu": {...},
    "memory": {...},
    "network": {...},
    "fs": {...},
    "runtime": {...},
    "rlimit": {...}
  },
  "pods": [
    {
      "podRef": {
        "name": "pod-name",
        "namespace": "namespace",
        "uid": "pod-uid"
      },
      "startTime": "2024-01-01T00:00:00Z",
      "containers": [...],
      "cpu": {...},
      "memory": {...},
      "network": {...},
      "volume": [...],
      "ephemeral-storage": {...},
      "process_stats": {...}
    }
  ]
}
```

> ## Metrics Categories

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Available metrics

Kubernetes {{< skew currentVersion >}} provides the following metrics:

```

> ### Node-Level Metrics

Author: are these section breakdowns too much detail - should we just mention at a high level across all scopes (Node/Pod/Container)?

> ### Node-Level Metrics

Reviewer: Style nit
```suggestion
## Node-level-metrics
```

Author: @lmktfy  is the second hyphen intentional? I would assume it's "Node-level metrics"

- **CPU**: Usage statistics including total usage and cumulative usage
- **Memory**: Working set, available memory, usage, RSS, and page faults
- **Network**: Interface statistics with RX/TX bytes and errors
- **Filesystem**: Capacity, available space, and usage for the root filesystem
- **Runtime**: Container runtime information and image filesystem stats

> - **Rlimit**: System resource limits

Reviewer: - I'd use a Markdown description list. See https://sebastiandedeyne.com/description-lists-in-markdown for an example.
- Write the metric names exactly as they appear in the API, and inside backticks

> ### Pod-Level Metrics

Reviewer: Style nit
```suggestion
### Pod-level metrics
```

- **CPU**: Aggregate CPU usage for all containers in the pod
- **Memory**: Aggregate memory statistics for the pod
- **Network**: Pod-level network I/O statistics
- **Volume**: Usage statistics for each volume mounted in the pod

> - **Ephemeral Storage**: Total filesystem usage for containers and emptyDir volumes

Reviewer: - I'd use a Markdown description list. See https://sebastiandedeyne.com/description-lists-in-markdown for an example.
- Write the metric names exactly as they appear in the API, and inside backticks

> ### Container-Level Metrics

Reviewer: Style nit
```suggestion
### Container-level metrics
```

- **CPU**: Per-container CPU usage and cumulative usage
- **Memory**: Per-container memory statistics
- **Rootfs**: Container writable layer usage
- **Logs**: Container logs storage usage

> - **Accelerators**: GPU and other accelerator metrics (if applicable)

Reviewer: - I'd use a Markdown description list. See https://sebastiandedeyne.com/description-lists-in-markdown for an example.
- Where relevant, write the metric names exactly as they appear in the API, and inside backticks
  - don't write "user-defined metrics" etc inside backticks.

- **User-defined metrics**: Custom metrics exposed by containers

> ## Data Sources

Reviewer: Style nit
```suggestion
## Data sources
```

By default, the kubelet collects these metrics using an embedded
[cAdvisor](https://github.com/google/cadvisor). However, when the
`PodAndContainerStatsFromCRI` [feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/)
is enabled, the kubelet can fetch pod and container metrics directly from the
[Container Runtime Interface (CRI)](/docs/concepts/architecture/cri/).

> ## Common Use Cases

Reviewer: Style nit
```suggestion
## Common use cases {#use-cases}
```

1. **Monitoring Solutions**: Tools like metrics-server (prior to v0.6.x) use the
   Summary API to collect cluster-wide metrics.

2. **Debugging Resource Usage**: Administrators can query the API to understand
   actual resource consumption versus configured requests and limits.

3. **Custom Autoscaling**: The Summary API can provide data for custom autoscaling

>    solutions or vertical pod autoscaling.

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
   solutions or [vertical pod autoscaling](/docs/concepts/workloads/autoscaling/#scaling-workloads-vertically).
```

4. **Capacity Planning**: Historical data from the Summary API helps in understanding
   resource utilization patterns.

> ## Limitations and Considerations

Reviewer: (style nit)
```suggestion
## Limitations and considerations
```

- Starting with metrics-server v0.6.x, the preferred endpoint is `/metrics/resource`
  instead of `/stats/summary`.
- The Summary API provides point-in-time data and doesn't store historical metrics.

> - Access to the Summary API requires appropriate RBAC permissions when accessed
>   through the API server.

Reviewer: RBAC is optional (you can roll your own authz)
```suggestion
- Access to the Summary API via the API server requires appropriate permissions.
  See [authorization](/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authorization/) for more information.
```

> - The data format is specific to Kubernetes and differs from Prometheus-style metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The data format is specific to Kubernetes; it's not a standard format such as
  OpenMetrics or Prometheus.
```

You should not use `curl` in insecure mode over a network you do not **fully** trust.

The Kubernetes project recommends that you use `kubectl proxy` for secure access.
{{< /warning >}}

## HTTP responses

The Summary API returns metrics in JSON format. The response contains comprehensive metrics organized
hierarchically:

```json
{
  "node": {
    "nodeName": "node-1",
    "systemContainers": [...],
    "startTime": "2024-01-01T00:00:00Z",
    "cpu": {...},
    "memory": {...},
    "network": {...},
    "fs": {...},
    "runtime": {...},
    "rlimit": {...}
  },
  "pods": [
    {
      "podRef": {
        "name": "pod-name",
        "namespace": "namespace",
        "uid": "pod-uid"
      },
      "startTime": "2024-01-01T00:00:00Z",
      "containers": [
        {
          "name": "container-name",
          "startTime": "2024-01-01T00:00:00Z",
          "cpu": {...},
          "memory": {...},
          "rootfs": {...},
          "logs": {...},
          "accelerators": [...]
        }
      ],
      "cpu": {...},
      "memory": {...},
      "network": {...},
      "volume": [...],
      "ephemeral-storage": {...}
    }
  ]
}
```

> ## Available metrics

Reviewer 2: @haircommander as part of an effort to migrate to CRI metrics, should we document exact set of metrics we promise to have in summary API?

Reviewer 2: Can you review what @tengqm suggests in https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/51317#issuecomment-4003964554?
